---
layout: default
---

# Ward Structure

Philadelphia is geographically divided into 66 **wards**. Each ward is further
divided into 10-50 **divisions** based on population. Every four years, during the
primary election of the governor’s race, registered democratic voters in each
division elect two of their neighbors to serve as the division’s democratic
**committeepersons**. Likewise, registered republican voters elect two republican
committee persons. The elected committee persons make up each party’s ward
committee, and vote for a ward leader shortly after the election, usually
informally at a meeting of the ward committee.  At full capacity, there are
both a republican and democratic ward leader for each ward as well as two
republican and two democratic committeepersons per division.  The ward leaders
form the party’s city committee, and elect its chair. The chair of the
Democratic City Committee is Congressman Robert A. Brady, and the chair of the
Republican City Committee is Joe DeFelice, both of whom are ward leaders
themselves.  What They Do

Ward leaders and committee persons make up the democratic and republican party
structures in the City of Philadelphia, and serve to drive voter registration
for their party and support of endorsed candidates. This involves Getting
signatures from voters to to get candidates on the ballot Building a network of
reliable voters Working outside the polling places on election day to
distribute campaign materials In addition, because primary elections involve
candidates of the same party running against each other, ward leaders vote to
decide which candidates receive the official party endorsement. In practice,
ward leaders often have their own priorities and support their own slate of
candidates on election day.  Why They Matter

With the exception of races like President or Mayor, where many voters are
familiar with the candidates, most elections in Philadelphia are significantly
influenced by the support of ward leaders. As a result, candidates often court
ward leaders. This can include: Financial contributions known as “street money”
used to pay committeepersons to get petition signatures door-to-door or hand
out flyers at their polling place on election day Direct lines of communication
after being elected A promise of a job in the candidate’s office for one of the
ward leader’s committeepersons Even more significant is the ability for ward
leaders to nominate who the party’s candidate will be in a special election.
For example, if a City Council member or state representative resigns in the
middle of their term, rather than conducting a primary election where voters
choose their party’s candidate to face-off against the other party’s, the
candidates for each party are chosen by the ward leaders. This grants to a
relatively small number of people significant influence in choosing individuals
who may go on to become public officials.  Elected only by their
committeepersons, the position of ward leader is typically a steady (albeit
unpaid) gig once obtained. Helping to ensure this is their ability to fill
vacant committeeperson slots by simply appointing someone. The access, cash,
jobs, and other favors at their disposal makes ward leaders powerful players in
Philadelphia elections. This transparency web site aims to bring a level of
spotlight to ward leaders that is more proportional to the power they wield.
Other Resources

Frequently Asked Questions How to Run for Committee Person - Committee of
Seventy Dave Davies from WHYY schools Patsy What else should we include here?
Tell us
